We moved to the country when I was 10 years old and my siblings were four six and eight
We absolutely loved the open spaces growing up here
Yeah, we were building all kinds of forts. We built a ship once. We used to all build forts together.
I think that's kind of you know the whole way that we were raised. We really stay on the farm a lot
We would do our school and we'd get that done
And we couldn't wait to get out and be creative and build something
I think that desire to build and create has just kind of stayed with all of us. As we got older being the millennials
we are, we eventually discovered
Technology and when we did it was iPods and that was it. We were sold.
When we were creative as kids, I think that creativity hasn't gone away kind of just gotten better. Our family has built a few earthbag buildings
So now it's time to put those skills to work once again.Build cheap buildings
Cheap buildings [laughter]
This is our biggest challenge so far. A recording studio
underneath and then there'll be a
workshop on top. The price to Build it somewhere between five to seven thousand. Which is a pretty good price for
a building. These kind of buildings are really nice because it allows the whole family to work on the building
Let us take you on our adventure and show you how our family works together to build it.
[music]
When we had Jeff out to dig a hole. We're really pre-planning to have the studio done
It's really really deep here. Maybe if we go this way here's the latter.
And then I want to show you. There we got  the whole crater
We noticed that the walls were kind of starting to have fallen a little bit so we decided to lay that foundation layer
That would be I would say pretty close to the center. Just to ensure that it wouldn't get buried because it was going to be
quite a few months before we would start building on it. We dug a trench all the way around the outside edges of where our walls
are going to be.
I'm taking the rock and putting it inside the foundation
We're going to be setting the walls on. We had originally planned to have a whole bunch of rock brought in so that we could
stack the two walls on top of each other and like a two-story building would be. We  changed our minds
we're able to expand the top section so that we could encompass the stairwell
It's your high-tech level mechanism using like two shovels and a string to level it all
Everything's good right here - I had gone through before and just kind of checked it
and eye balled it and it was level. Then the guys came in and they're starting to level it
And it's getting less and less
Level and then they'd be like. Oh, it needs to go up, and I was just like
nooooooooooooo
We use some railroad ties for the entry and we just kind of buried them and then on the top we went ahead and cut
one shorter to put on the top. All right do you got the drill bit? Drill some holes.
And then we took rebar and we banged it into it to hold the thing together and then that's going to go ahead and be
the entry downstairs. It's going to be a little bit challenging to get this thing in the ground. Get started huh guys?
Yes
Bryson's got his new haircut. I'm cooler. Cooler because I don't have all the hair on me and I'm cooler because I look cooler
No comment over there popsicle girl
So why didn't you bring one for all of us?
[music]
we've been really needing a sound studio and an art studio so I'm excited to have a place to work on my
costumes and family to work with
When we get around 18 inches high with the bags we lay the electric wire and boxes
[music]
Starting this right here
Yeah
We're gonna go ahead and put plastic around our building
We got some plastic here to act as a moisture barrier between the bags and the dirt. Is it pretty thick plastic? 6 mil
10-foot High
100 foot - should easily reach around the whole building
I'll keep pushing it out of our way as we grow, back filling, pushing it out of our way
You just want to make sure that you weren't involved in the mathematical calculation so  that you have no responsibility if it's wrong.
It you just said, "ya" to make me feel better.
we are
cutting out for the stairs. So is this is going to be inside or outside of the building itself. It's going to be inside.
Okay. For sloping our steps down so that we can stair step them. Cut them out as we go along
And then we'll be building forms down here
at the base. We have a four-foot landing in front of a door that goes in
Where there are pockets of mostly sand the walls cave in but the clay like you see above doesn't budge
Colapses, what do we do?
Lay underneath it with your mouth open
Yeah, your eyes wide open and facing up. That's what they teach you in avalanche training.
Go into the white smoke . Like a wave you know you go underneath it
[music]
Bags here and plastic separating the dirt from our bags
So that was a good burn Bry
Totally
there's all kinds of
geography, I mean every place has deserts everybody has rainforests and living in a certain area requires a certain type of dwelling. Our
geographical situation is far different than that might be in the Pacific Northwest or eastern
states like New York, and the makeup of our ground is totally different. The amount of rain
we get. We're only looking at about a foot of rain compared to
25 inches or more in the Pacific Northwest. It makes a big difference in what type of soil we get. So we had to
take these same things into consideration when we were building our
underground studio out of the earthbags. One is how much water do we get. What type of soil do we have. It has a
great deal of clay in it. It has a ton of caliche. Which is a calcium
So we have kind of a hard soil, especially that first three feet of our soil
And you have to pickaxe through that stuff to get down
And then there are pockets of sand here and there. The caliche level is like this first
First three feet you get a lot of rocks in our soil. There's a lot of clay inside here too, so it's very hard
Very very hard. That's just after a rain. It's time to strengthen the wall to ensure safety. First we backfill
[music]
We're just going to fill it up
Whoa Diesel good boy. Yeah. Oh are you going to pull him out?
[music]
Hi Diesel
Come here Diesel
Yeh!!!!
[music]
Okay, so we're going to put in the deadman just to help the walls
from caving in. It might be a little bit of overkill because of the way the bags compress on themselves
But better safe than sorry and this really isn't that hard to do so I think we're just going to go like three foot in
And then put like another three-foot chunk
Right there where going to do one bag out, one bag over
Stake a rebar through the two to hold the two together. Might even put a rebar in on this side
I'm going to do three. One here. We've got another one over there, and then one more by the staircase
It's kind of interesting
We're about halfway up
and it feels like we're starting on ground level again because we've backed filled around it and
Our bagger is going to be able to stand on that and so are we
[music]
So we had to say
How do we retain a circle inside of the ground. We have some forces that work
We have the force of gravity which pulls straight down
So how we fix that is that our bags are stacked directly on top of each other
And we have tamped so they are solid. So you get to get the idea that if you can compact the soil
you're going to return back to the caliche or to the solid packed ground which doesn't move
we have used barbed wire to help with the shear strength and
three just by it being a circle it retains the same types of strength as an arch. You can
Actually have an arch hold itself together
Throw it on side any forces that come from the outside in
Equally, press on the circle. Because all forces together - similar to the arch theory
The cool thing that this is, its rained because it means all of our dirt that we have been putting on the outside will settle nicely
That's why we put the plastic here. These are definitely solid.
We keep going up. Building these walls like a tube of toothpaste. I've always wanted to say that.
[music]
Cleats are placed to secure the bags to the doorframe
one more
We need several hanger cleats installed around the building in order to hang green screen and other background items on the wall
[music]
Do you know what it looks like? It looks like we're all standing on the same level. We are. Get on my level son.
Shae, you've never stood on something this high you're getting very good look tall for you
[music]
there you go, I
Find that if I stay in the air-conditioning all summer long
I don't really - the summer gets really super super hot so I find if I can get out and work in it.
And your body just seems to get used to it. So it's really important to get out early
It's really hot outside. It's not hot, just our brains
telling us it's hot
Are you ready?
Yes, I am. Wow, that's gonna
keep the sun off. It was only $25. I was like I couldn't say no
[music]
Go get it. Quick, I only have so much time before he come backs
Here have some dirt. Will you scoot that way?
Look at that
It's the simple things in life
Bryson has always been a boy of wonder. We all wonder too - guys. I got a speck of dirt on me
[music]
What we're now calling the MusArt studio. Get it cuz this going to be an art and a music studio
For our steps here. We have a four foot opening going up. Our first actual going up. It's going to be right there
Is that cool? Bryson, Shell? How does that sound? Yes.
Okay
And we want to have steps that are going to be about seven and a half
Inches high on the Riser and we're going to pour a 12 inch thread
but then we're going to lay the next step on an inch and a half so we'll have a
Ten and a half inch tread. We built one frame so that allowed us to just use that same frame throughout the entire build.
[music]
All right good. Let's try with this. It doesn't need to be too sturdy. It's these that need to be fairly sturdy.
But I think we're okay
[music]
The steps were rectangular however they needed to go in a spiral going up
So you have one side that a bit little smaller on the other side larger. So that's the first step Huh? Yeah, this is the second
One step at a time
And then we tear the frame out on and set our next step and then put our next step in and then pull the frame
Out and keep using the same frames all the way up. So this overlaps onto the concrete
An inch and a half this is number one two three four
five six
[music]
So you're just doing steps and suddenly ...what?
what the
Dog! Monday was at you? Was it you Monday? or Diesel? Who was it? Who put their paw in this?
And talk about feet print. I gonna put my foot in there.
You feeling pretty good today?
hundred percent
hundred percent?
so we went waterskiing and
The sun kissed us and then my muscles wouldn't work. I couldn't get myself to haul in all this big heavy
Bottom out of the water. I'm a teenager and I can't move.
You weren't the one skiing behind the boat. See. Smart.
Perfect alright, we're done
We're done. We're done. We're done.
Garen begins planning the layout for the upstairs circle. We wanted our bigger circle to be centered in our smaller circle and
the Center Circle has the staircase so we had to kind of account for that, so we move the reference pole over and
Put a little extension on it, so we could get higher
I got my pole in and draw it out then I'm going to level it off - start laying the next layer of bags
Won't we? Yes, we will
[music]
I'm taking a highest point in the bags so we can know where to put the top of the stairs  - actually the inner circle
We counted for a six-foot opening. The two front posts there that you see are for French doors that are going to go in
possibility of me putting a six-foot slider in
[music]
This is the desert for you. One second it'll be like hey
It's all nice and sunny and the next it says now I'm going to pour rain on you
We're installing a a berm around just the side of the building - getting a little bit of pooling
inside of our first layer. We need to be able to divert the water out of the foundation level. That's a common building problem
That's not just us but any builder has to keep water out of their foundo.
We're going to see how well this this holds up. Hi pig
It has made of our bags a little bit soggy on the outside so we had to let them dry out
They get that wet all the way through like a real mud - move them at all and then they just turn into this real
Mush and it can cause tons of problems all the way down
We don't touch the bags when they're that soaked. We just let them dry out naturally. I'm not playing. I'm sidetracking the dogs so Mom can video
So therefore. I am a key piece of
instrumental work
Sure rather than an adornment.
I don't even know what that is. Like a decoration. Yeah rather than a decoration.
[music]
We've put in about an hour a day
Maybe a little bit more on the circle to try to get in a row a day
We'll work in the morning when it's not raining and then cover the bags so that we get whatever afternoon rains come through
We won't soak our bags so bad. We'll be able to work the next day
[music]
It's amazing how fast it really goes when you just do one one row a day. That thing will be up in no time
The Walls continue to grow
Nice, whiny wheels. We see who's the squeaky wheel is this family.
The guys begin to prepare for the electrical outlets?
We install the electrical boxes like you would a cleat. We just nailed the boxes right to the plywood.
The duplex boxes we're using have nails on the box itself so it's like nailing it to a stud
[music]
She should be out here learning electrical. She could learn to wire her house.  You never know Bry.
Okay, so the question is I have one more outlet
Where would you want it? Three across there, rocket stove, one right there? I think it looks perfect, okay?
We just run the wire in between the bags and make sure they're separated from the barbed wire so we don't get any
shorting going on. Inside or outside? Outside wire, inside barbed wire
It's easier than trying to pin it to the wall later and cob over it. Subscribe if you want to see more "U" nails
[music]
What's that one now Garen? Your light switch that you said we needed because you were right. We needed one.
What's up with you being right today Mom?
[music]
When the kids get a room
they get a dog and Bryson hasn't gotten his yet when we finished his room four months back
I think he just wanted to kind of settle in. When the kids get up in their teenage years you know you no longer really
like when
they're little you hug them and you cuddle with them. As they get older you know you just don't do it anymore
That's tough when dad lays a big kiss on them
so we like them to have an animal when they get up in that age because
That just gives them something that they can they can cuddle with and love on. I was thinking more like a teacup poodle
For Bryson? Yeah.  Get a poodle. You want to get a poodle?
Yeah, a poodle shaved all the way down to the skin with just its tail. They make...
God makes those. They're just called hairless poodle
Exactly. You wouldn't have to shave it. You can get a Great Dane took so it can tackle Diesel. I thought about that
I think you should get a not so Great Dane. Real small. I want a really hairy dog that doesn't shed or bark
Or eat or poop. I think you're talking about a statue. How about a cuddly toy like a plushy toy. They could cuddle that.
It's now window level
We got the window wraps. I gained weight
Watch your toes!
This particular room has larger windows. We went with a three foot by five foot windows. Dad's nailing these
braces in to keep them square
So that you don't have a window. That's like
In Bryson's  building we used two by twelves on
Bree and Garen's building we used to two by tens so I went back to the two by tens
The cost of the Layout
I eye balled too much... We just wait while  dad and Garen plan out all the windows
Garen's bothered by that window right there. Dad likes it symmetrical. Garen is all like...
We can't do that
[music]
Diesel are you picking beans over there? Are you eating them?
These are tent poles, and we're going to use these to reinforce the walls between the windows. Like we've done in the past.
Little bit of movement on this wall because of all the rains we've had lately.  Come over here. We get a shot of this. You can see a little bit of movement on the wall.
We're out of plumb. The best way that fix these things is to brace them off. I was  hoping to avoid it
but that's what we have
[music]
Use the pole in the pole
and we run our circle around that way we get our
Perfect circle that we want. I take the rope pull it tight in this case
I'm just using a knot as my marker and just running around
do that mark that all the way around the building before I tamp it and then we just follow that all the way up the
Building and then our walls are relatively straight
[music]
There was only half a brick
It rains like a lot. We had a giant storm come through. It gets the bags wet and blows off our tarps
Yeah, we have such a bad storm. They'll get wet lower down to so everything will be soaked
[music]
So we should go down and take a look at the underneath here
It seems like it is actually holding up really well. I mean, I don't see any like bulging, collapsing anywhere
Which is good
Oh you can see water is pooled down here definitely
We had a lot of rain
Yeah, it seems to be holding up really nice actually
as solid as ever
Hey look a little mesquite tree. Look at that. Hey, you know if we wait long enough, It can be the center post
After weeks of dodging rainstorms we finally get a reprieve.
We quickly jump into work to reach the top of the window boxes with bags.
What was it he got wrong?
I don't know
[music]
One of the ways to help reach our goals sooner is to cut the top of the window boxes off
We wanted to go ahead and shorten the walls to accommodate the roof a little better
We decided to go ahead and drop them down one foot and that brings the whole roof down one foot. The wall height was just getting too high
after we add everything on top of the windows. It's going to be a skyscraper before we can get the roof on
[music]
In this building, I really wanted to do a lot of bottles. When you put them together
I don't want them to stick out too far beyond the bag because then you have cobb around and they stick out
so I'm trying to stay real close to the same width. Where do you think, Bry, right there?
Yeah
With bottles you can't just run barb over them and tamp over them like normal
because all the weight, when it starts building up will eventually break that bottle
So you have to like you put the bottle in and back up to it
and then do a thin layer over the top of it and then when you tamp, you only tamp up to it
Don't tap on top of it until at least you get the next layer on
Beer bottles
They're not beer bottles
[music]
I like this arch
When we first started the design process for this and everything, Dad really wanted to put in buttresses
We talked them out of it because we don't like the look
Because we didn't put the buttresses in. It is possible that we had more problems than we really
would normally have had.  If you too many layers too fast and they never get a chance to dry and harden
It's like a bag that can move even even with it just being damp. Once it gets hardened
the thing is Rock solid. A 30 foot circle on a 14 inch bag is
Absolute max
that you'd ever want to do. It really is. We didn't really know that going in and we didn't really think that far
We didn't even think it would matter really because we've had such good luck with the smaller circles
And then once we got to a certain height we had some issues with just
setting the walls and our center line got a little shorter at one point it brought the walls in and out and normally that would
be okay
But then we had a big rain come through. It soaked the bags all the way through down to the bottom one
It caused a lot of weakening to happen and then it started to buckle
I mean if we were put buttresses in, we wouldn't had these problems
It was the worst place for something like this to happen, but it did right there. We noticed it was definitely moving
So we're going to try to fix it. We decided to use come-alongs. So we're at the base of the door downstairs
We're able to connect the come-along at the base, run a cable all the way up to the wall
We're able to run the cable through. We put a backing on the back of that.Back and around out to the come-along and then
use the come-along to bring the wall in
That is already a ton better. Look at this line. I'd go some more
He needs to be pushed in and I'm thinking we could tamp it and it would move it over and then tamp it down
So this isn't going anywhere
Got this, you know
[music]
It's really working good. Garen come out here and look. We are already at one hundred two and a half. So we're moving a lot
Dirt on the center bag here since we had that big rain - all the dirt is still damp - hasn't dried yet
So it's going to resettle really nice
And if it was all dry the wall would weaker. This "s" turn kind of thing we had going on
we were able to get that straighten out. When we were doing
this, one of our links in the wire we were using ended up popping, which,
I guess you kinda always
You're always afraid of it. So you're always careful around it, but uh
It actually happened this time. Yeah it come out about six or eight inches. Didn't it? At least
The come-alongs work really good to pull the wall back to where we wanted it
I think what was was the spring effect where we had pulled it in. When it busted
It's just like whoa. It went as far
as it could go instead of just coming back to normal so it went a little bit past
We brought it back in and it's just unforeseen. We can't always - sometimes things break
It's actually a pretty good testament to what the bags - how sturdy
they really are. I mean to be able to spring back like that and hang out just at a crazy angle and just stop
I mean that's - it really is quite amazing
Dad's first thing was he just wanted to tamp it and I was like no no
No, you can't just tamp a giant section
Just does not work, and then you have to go over and I was out of ideas and so I was like okay
Dad's gone, we can test the tamp now
[music]
It looks better. It does.
Don't tell Dad how we did it. Actually did end up working, a little. Was that hard to admit?
Yes. Look at that wall. Look at that wall.
How beautiful is that?  Better than it was.  We managed to get it back in and get everything all put back together
[music]
We're digging some holes to put some posts here to hold up our murphy bed. So that worked really well
We not only get posts for the murphy band, but we also get posts for the wall - can help support it
[music]
Hey, didn't move at all. It's good
I've been thinking about some different types of roofs like this reciprocal roof thing kind of came up
We needed to build a reciprocal roof as kind of an example - a reference
[music]
The guys bisect the circle, draw a line, and create eight equal segments
You went slow all the way across. I could of drawn six circles
I'll show you how its done. What do you call that?
boom
bi-section
[music]
Look at that line! A little better [laughter]
So we were signaling outer space, weren't we? Our symbols in the ground
If you land here you can take us with you
[music]
Yeah, I think this will work pretty good. Dad is using an excellent method of attachment
Alright there it is. And it was strong enough that one of us got up there and stood on it.
Gosh that is amazing guys
[music]
We went down purchased all of our wood -  got our great big
30-Footers. 30 foot 2 by 8. Eight of them.
I wonder what kind of  trees they had to chop down to get those
at least 30 feet
[music]
Everything look good?
So what is this? Dad, are you sure you got these right?
This one goes like
[music]
Hang on Hang on
And I'll going to figure it out. I thought I was going to just keep doing this over and over and it would work
It would work if we were doing that
We can create a
monster! We've created a master piece.
This is not going on the video
[whispers] It's going on the video
[sings] We are the champions? Y'all go jo kim ah you better not me. I'm handling your eggs this thing in
[music]
the world's Heaviest Hula hoop
I think we got it figured it out now. So all we've been doing today is just building sketchy scaffolding.
It will work
The scaffolding looks like this crazy mechanism that was held up by one post
No, I it had four posts.
Looked like it was one. It was scarier than heck but it was fun.
No, it wasn't scary
[music]
Oh, my flailing system fun. I bet you wish you were up here
back a little more
[music]
Yes, that's it. Yeah
Intersection. Yes!
[music]
Ahh!
Did it fall?
Then on top of that, they decided to put a ladder on top of all that
We couldn't quite get high enough - scaffolding only reached so far. So we had to get up on top of that
It's probably 25 feet
[music]
You're at the best view to see if this is level. Can you stand up to see if the  top of that is level? Do you feel comfortable?
There we go
See where we're at people
[music]
Push Push Push
um
He's on that edge, and it's just if he just takes one step back. There's like nothing
Nothing to catch him
It's so scary. They're, they're very brave
they're doing a great job is just
Look at that. It's so stressful
Just watching them. I can't stay out here
[music]
Hey, we got to see up in the air and thanks to Sam and Garen and Bryson
we got all our rafters up in the air and
Everything's looking real good. Ready to go
[music]
With the rafters placed, it's time to get leveling. It's about four foot across there.
actually that one is our highest one
we're just gonna go around and level and nail off all the rafters so that the roof is
is level
[music]
Someone chewed up our line level.  Yeah Bryson.
What does this look familiar? Does that look familiar?
[music]
So that's your new line level right there.
Yeah it's our new line level. It's top of the line.
Top of the line [laughter]
Look at that beauty. It's so big for the hard of seeing.  Hard of seeing that's the wrong words
Visually impaired. It's bold.
That way Dad can see it
[music]
This was a spot in the bag where the rain
It got so wet that it was oozing out of the bag and now it's like
completely solid
[music]
Here down here, you're looking up there - you're seeing this beautiful -  little wonderful curve that comes up
Here, I'll show you how they work
Sorry Bry
It's going to be boards that are going to come down here to help with these. They set up here like this this
to support the boards that are going to come out
We're putting in Jack rafters that fill in between the rafters
and that helps with the support
Yeah, some guy named jack did it.  I don't know why but they named him Jack.
We named the monkey Jack
Arhhhh
Do you want to do the other ones now? I'll get this first 34 for you. Inside or out?
It's inside.
I got it
You know what's really cool is to
vave garen up there taking measurements and laying out and doing all that and then just hollering down
measurements for me to cut. Now he's going to be able to do it on his own
Over a little more a quarter of an inch - go back
[music]
The guys begin installing the Fascia - the face of the roof
We built the fascia in kind of a zigzag pattern which is the same width and dimensions of the rafters themselves
So it's kind of nice to be able to build it in that way
I know some folks will save money with using smaller materials, but I kind of like to match the tails with the facia material
[music]
Done
We're always really happy when we get to this point the bagging
We're on the last bay section, and then we're like, we're done for good and then it's cobbing and roof
This is victory my brother
We have won the battle but not the war
[music]
The kids they think they've done bagging but there's a little bit more that we're going to have to do but
They're feeling pretty good about life so I'm not going to say anything
We first found this whole idea of the reciprocal roof from doing a little bit of research on the internet
I found this pdf of reciprocal roofs by a gentleman that's a designer engineer that's in Japan and
There was a lady, her name is Olga
Popovic. She had done a great little review of that particular process
And how that was all done. The name of it called reciprocal frame architecture in Japan and check it out on Google
So it's very confident that this was a good process. Started cutting roof and designing it
just like it was done in Japan. The idea, too
is that we have compression rings at the top and a compression ring at the bottom
It's very similar to a yurt or a teepee even for that matter you have a compression ring at the top
Where you rope around the tepee poles
I'm very happy with the results, and I've been building roofs for a long time and very fun - fits a circle just perfect
[music]
Dad wants to reinforce the frame with a cable system similar to a yurt. He heads to our metal junk pile
to look for needed parts
We'll look for a pipe for this.
Here it is
perfect
If we run the wire through there it won't risk
Breaking eventually
okay now to make it pretty do you think we need to cut the other side off?
I don't think it needs to look pretty we're not seeing it right?
Yeah, this shows
[whispers] Oh, it shows
I say we do the four bend and clean them. I didn't realize we were...
you still can do the four bend
[music]
De-burring
Are you cold?
Yeah, I am cold. It's colder out here. I'm still in shorts.
Freezing out here. It's not suppose to be cold.
Garen's not in shorts but you always were the bright one?
Bright one what?
the smart one
oh [laughter]
Don't look over my work.
I'm not looking.
Yeah, right
we have enough in here
perfectionist
You're not going to see it from 40 feet in the air
just bring the pair of pliers and their cable thing you wanted
to do
[music]
What is your plan with these?
put these in here
And yeah, maybe against the wall, so it's all - looks the same
Just drilling a hole right there. Slamming this through - running our cable. We only have eight to do it shouldn't take that long. Does that sound good?
Yeah, that sounds good
[music]
There we go. That's one
Cable that we're installing now, is something similar to a compression ring
which holds all the bottoms of the rafters in and it's kind of an extra measure of
I haven't built one of these before so I'm kind of going with something a little extra at the bottom - like a yurt
[music]
the cable is going to be below the ceiling level so we do get the opportunity to tighten it and use it as a
Hang Banners or something from. It'll be fun
[music]
That's all I need. Nice.  That's the insurance right there baby. That's all I need.
We went down  to get our plywood for the roofing section, but then I usually like to buy the plywood
But the wood has become so much more expensive than I went with the osb
It should be eight feet
it's not it's a little too long though
It's happening
Yeah
One Bay complete
[music]
It's looking good. Coming together
the last Mellon. That's it!
[music]
This is the top plate that the curve will set on
Dad made a seven sided polygon. I'm gone like the wind
you didn't measure the right distance
Well, let's just pull this one and cut off another one that's a half inch longer.
three fails this morning
Well third time's a charm right?
Fourth times a charm
Fourth? All right, then
[music]
Perfect. You are a genius.
We knew you had it in you, dad. We always believed you
[music]
Through the hole
Well, I missed it
We receive a surprising call from Susie, an Ondura representative offering us materials to use on our roof. Today it arrives
[music]
push
box of nails
We're sure thankful that they gave us some product and we're all set. It's awesome
It's really awesome very excited very grateful these guys so willing to do this.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
Tar paper time
[music]
We're gonna go ahead and tarp it
He's going up. He's going up!
He's going up
He's not moving
Right up there
[music]
That's good enough. We can figure this out now
Okay, you can change this. You can slide it up and down.
Yeah
Start putting up the first bay kind of figuring out where we want everything and how we want to start laying them out. Wind starts
Picking up - looking like it's gonna rain
[music]
Your width measurement now if you could give me that?
Let me nail this so that I don't move it.
What we need to do is sight these
Yeah, go to the right at the top just a touch. That's it right there
Back a little bit - there. That's it that's perfect
At one point it blew even some of our sheets off.
well, they're tough
yeah, they are
throw together the one bay that we got
okay, I'm I'm going for it right now
put things away and wait for tomorrow to finish it up
[music]
ut oh. injury
suppose to hammer the nail not your finger
tell that to the hammer
It's the hammers fault
yeah, it's the hammer's fault. It's out of balance
unbelievable
sorry Garen. It's called training
poor Workman blames his tools
Garen
Our good friend Marvin came out to help us out and we're very excited to have him out here
he's quite - quite the carpenter
[music]
now I've seen a lot of kids with saws and crews the stuff that I've run and
It's amazing to watch these guys use these saws. They're so confident. They're using them properly
safely
very impressed
[music]
So we're trying to figure out a solution to this skylight
And I think we might of found one
I think it's the best idea so far. If it leaks...
I think it's Bryson's fault regardless
[laughter]
Now it's time to put the skylight on
[music]
Skylights on my friend. That means our job is done
The guys decide to start from the bottom up. They head inside and downstairs to start the soil cement floor
we set the grade by taking two bricks for leveling and putting one in the center of the floor and
at the seal of the door
And then we level it from the seal to the middle of the room.
We want to have the right grade, the right amount of dirt
So that we put it in the cement everything gets mixed in there. We don't have to pull anything out
There he is. We were fortunate to have everybody marvin come out and help again
[music]
I've joined the Marvin, Bryson, Shae team
Is he trying to pull it up?
He's trying to help you
Diesel, pull on it. Go that way
Come on Diesel. Good boy. Pull!
[music]
First time we turn this entire thing
I turned the whole thing by shovel first and then you guys did the tiller
[music]
the young guy in the room
Bryson, was able to like do twice as much work for us because you know
We're seasoned carpenters you know and so
We weren't as apt at a shovel as he was so
poor workmen blames his tool.
I'm not blaming the shovel
I'm just blaming the bodies of the two old guys that you are working with
you didn't know you were coming over for this did you Marvin.
No
Yeah
[music]
[laughter]
There's something really enjoyable about that
[music]
So we use the water to actually dampen and keep the dust at the same time and then I got a chance to spray
Bryson every now, and then which was fun.
He only did it once surprisingly I expected more
[music]
When we lived in the city. You know we were putting the kid's in activities
Which is great. Ativities are great
But I think those moments that we spend working alongside each other are probably the most valuable
moments, we have with them. It allows us to build that relationship with them
You know they get to see to how we handle problems. And how we don't handle problems very well
So they'll see some of our mistakes, and they'll say that
we're not as perfect as we think we are. So it's humbling
And it's enjoyable because you're sharing and the kids get something out of it
I get something.I learn all the time
and you, you're good leveler.
I mean with Dad. Not taking Dad out. Just helping
We get to see how our kids handle stressful situations
The rock bent the tine?
on how they handle situations when they are tired
It just allowed us these moments to intervene
Try this again, I'm almost done with my crop circle
Did you hit another rock?
yes
Oh no
[laughter] It's huge
[music]
Call that done hey?
Gonna rinse this thing off
[music]
Now we got to focus on leveling it.
and then we tamp it
[music]
Oh no. Diesel you're gonna get me in trouble.
Don't make any paw prints.
quick quick
We need to find and cut down some good tree limbs to replace the temporary posts for the entryway of the studio
We're at the pile of potential
posts
[music]
Want to help me pull this out?
Yeah, let me
wait, hold on
[music]
What do you think of these two? This one? That one? How fun
Dad makes plans to frame the floor
Put my double two by ten and then come out to about four feet and then cantilever back over the top of this
[music]
and so after the cleats are built we take twenty foot two by Tens and
Clap them together and then put them across the long distances - the longest part of the circle
And then we'll just shrink it down from there and just put singles
Bring it down here,
Bryson can practically push it
I can push it flat
Yeah, he's amazing.
you can nail that end in...
Show them Bry. Show them your strength
[music]
Because it doesn't have a brain it can't defeat us. Right boys?
The one that's going to determine the height
I think is going to be that one over there. The one next one over
or this one right here
we're going to put them in but not nail them and then decide
[music]
We basically lifted up the sides of the cleat so that we got a nice level floor
I think that's pretty dead-on
Exactly
Our goal is to finish the floor this week, so the guys continue installing the floor joists
[music]
four five six seven
We'll go ahead and block it up so they can work on it
When Bryson and Dad are filling in the sections on the floor, us gals are bagging in between the joists
[music]
We were asked if us girls use power tools.
I use power tools
It can't stick up
[music]
That is a hack job
the bags are like Adobe Bricks, but with nails in between them to secure the floor
[music]
I think I may have too much in here
can you get out?
Are you stuck?
[music]
Yeah, please take it
There we go
but hang on, it's wrapped like three times around
and you call yourself safe?
hang on
you are scaring me
and that is why we don't show us using power tools
That was dumb
you didn't get that on video did you?
No
okay
I don't want you to see that
We can do a couple of these before it gets too dark
all the way to the wall
okay
We're going to take these 8-footers and  we're going to run them out over the top of the stairwell
cantilever them out
we're going to party like it's...
we're going to party
[music]
Hi Buddy
Now, what are you going to do?
[music]
Hey, we're selecting our posts now for stair railing.Does this look like a great post?
It has some memories too into it - from our tire swing
Oh yeah
Kind of excited to do a mesquite stair rail
What's good about a post that's secure is if you can actually make it part of the floor
so it can bolt it down
[music]
That's what's cool about Mesquite is that it's really twisty.
It's all over the place. It's not like plywood. Straight
[music]
We bolt it right to the two by tens
We're going to run that at 38 inches on the post height and maybe like 40 for the top
section after we get the railing piece on.
and then bag right up against it and then put some blocks in
so that makes really nice strong posts as opposed to just like
Attaching it with a bracket or something to the top of a deck
[music]
Now that the main stair posts our in, we're going to head downstairs
laying down from our electrical
yep
Doing the three-way switch, so we turn the lights on and off upstairs and the fan, too
[music]
Okay, so we are doing wall prep.
Not a lot of prep though right guys just a little bit?
What you're seeing is the aftermath
I was carrying this on my shoulder, then when it got right to shoulder height, it went "boop" like this.
The plan you guys are doing
is mixing mud with perlite
[music]
One to one for right now - kind of see how it turns out
We're going to add some water probably just a little bit.
I wouldn't add too much
Alright, should we go test it?
Yeah
[music]
Okay, let's pour some in Dad. Want to help me?
We got it to a peanut butter
Mixture that was their first one then I went to pancake batter. I wanted it a little bit thinner
What do you think of that Bry?
Well, it's sure a texture
that's soft
Yeah. More?
Okay this is yours. I gotta go make more.
Sound moves in a straight line until it hits something and
then the more times it hits something, the weaker the sound gets
So the idea was with the rolls of the bag we get a little bit of deadening. Also to
it reflects off of the little pieces of perlite so that it bounces off something.
The more bouncing we can get in there really
Is the better. If  I can get all kinds of different angles and soft material
then that causes the sound to deaden, and that's we're trying to get  is a dead sound
Sounds good when you're standing in the middle like this. When you move over here is really does get quieter
over here
are we going to paint this down here too?
Yeah
Isn't this perlite for gardening?
yes
Do you want more water?
Yeah
The test  - think pancake batter
No
no?
I was thinking about something else.
He was thinking of food. When I say pancake, it was like, "cool dinner time!"
actually I was thinking about food
[laughter]
[music]
So we have our fans
and we got our piping. The dog stuck his head in here, and it got jammed on his head [laughter]
This was kind of broken and kind of hanging off
And so we're trying to get it off. Dad get over here
I need your help.
You need to run.
Hopefully, we can salvage it and get some pipe out of it and basically our fan hooks up to this piece
this pipe to supposed to stretch out to eight feet but
it's got a few feet missing
Diesel you did not learn the first time? Do not stick your head in there. I think he might of enjoyed it
[music]
putting the air vent in now
Is going to be our draw so it will draw air from down there and push it up in here
It's got to go up that high. If we can grab the lowest, coldest air down there
Which is at the very very bottom right and pull that up so what we'll do is
We'll just run that four inch by 12 inch pipe
They make this like this, and we'll just go right straight down alongside the wall
you always need good airflow down there
It also gives good airflow.
Yes, and get fresh air
[music]
Shelly and I were just like traveling around one of the hardware stores
And we bumped into this architectural glass we picked up a couple of these and we'll be installing them in the floor
[music]
You want to put it in?
Can I?
yeah
Think that that can handle the weight of a person?
yeah, why don't you step on it and see?
Easily.
Glad my foot didn't go through that would been a disaster
[music]
This goes in here in the wall, collects light from the outside, but it all has to come through this hole
This week we'll start by doing some painting downstairs
[music]
Hi Buddy
Kind of like a grayish
I like it
The plan today is to put in the can light.
You can do it!
camo-ing to put the can lights in
Oh yeah
For people like me.
Who make simple mistakes
well, that's ridiculous
It is
re-duck-ulus
Is that a head holder?
Yeah
Where were you when I put mine in?
you know it doesn't matter to have that crooked
does to me now.
doesn't matter to
be honest
[music]
If you think the guys were the only ones working then we're going to give you a sneak peek of a future video. Follow me
Whoa are those little dragons?
Yes. This is a dragon rocket stove which is built over the dirt foundation in the corner of the MusArt studio
We have a separate video that documents this build
We start the acoustic ceiling downstairs
We have some landscaping cloth here that will be running underneath the floor joists
And this will help keep the insulation that we're going to want to put between the rafters
Held into place we pull a ceiling tile down. We don't get a face full of insulation
[ringing] Hello
Bryson, where are you? We need you?
I'm literally right here
Really because like we need you. Dad's already like - I think he's almost done
[music]
so we ran into town
We picked up our tongue and  groove for our decking and we got all of our insulation too
kind of made out of jeans material
and that kind of stuff. So it has better sound quality
Wow
[music]
It usually has this grid system
and I didn't want to lose any ceiling so we decided right up on the bottom of those rafters
Dad found a
really really interesting way of holding the acoustic tiles
I thought it was spectacular.
[music]
It already sounds like the recording studio
Last piece going up
All right trim is done
And it's looking beautiful
We're going to do this whole circle with this insulation because this is right above the sound studio
And this is supposed to have higher sound qualities because it's made out of recycled jeans
And I guess recycled cotton and that stuff
When you stick your hand in here, and you're like
brushing stuff out, it feels like petting something and all the hairs are falling off of it
ew!
What a picture that paints
we decided to put a mask on because
I think we're moving at blazing speeds so all the dust is coming up. Don't you think Shae?
yes, sure
There is actually a blower for this installation
But we live too far from town to go rent one and a have to go take it back. Too much driving
So we're doing it by hand, but it's cool
We got this
The guys jump in to help a little bit with the insulation
Everyone comes up with their own unique way of busting up that insulation.
This is just our tool
we've been using for sculpting and
putting cob up - trowl
And then I just kind of scratch at it
and it just gets a
lot faster than tools or
Really anything
So I think I found very best way break up the insulation
You can do like half a bag at a time and just put it in there
Pinch off the top with your hands just slam into the ground
breaks the whole thing up in a couple hits
half bag a time
[music]
We're ready to screw that one down
We're also using screws, and we're going really close together. We're using a lot of screws.
And the floor feels really solid because of it
[music]
There's a big difference between putting a floor down in a square room where you're using square materials and here
we are trying to actually put a square peg in a round hole
It did make for some interesting cuts.
We had interesting things happening around and yeah, it was a lot of fun actually
[music]
We're gonna Dance on this floor. My baby and me
This week it's time for windows and doors
[music]
All right
Good boy good boy. Yeah, this is bullet. He's my new dog. He is a good doggy
[music]
It's interesting too with the bag building as you tamp the bags down
any frames you put in place
you have to make sure they are dead level
And either nail them or level then in as you go
because as you put those bags in and tamp those back down your frames
can shift around a little bit
There's a crack
That's a kind double pane. So double pane because we have to take it back.
I was just gonna say pain. ahhhhh
you're such a pain Bryson
[music]
Putting in some trim around the windows
easy peasy
nail them down, cut the sides. pew pew
[music]
We were out enjoying our cobbing session, singing.
As usual
Singing. Normal. Laughing, enjoying each other's company
and then
Bryson joins us and our wonderful little session turns into an argument about measurements
you treated her like she didn't know anything so I will respond
What is that even
I know all sorts of measurements because I work in like you know like stuff and I'm like
Huh. You wanna go?
Do you know what a cubit is? No, but I know what a cupid is.
Do you know what a centimeter is
And I was like no, Bryson. I don't know what a centimeter is
but in the end
I won because he didn't know what a cubit was
that Shae, I mean, she did not know what a cubit was
I wanted to move onto other things 'cuz you know, I can ace a lot of things, but measurements aren't one of them
Okay move over that way a little bit
the doors are really sensitive things. A centimeter off and it won't shut so it's like
They're really difficult yo
Get right
get one corner 90 and  the rest of its lines up. On double doors
It's a little more complicated because you got six foot. We want that to be even all the way around
You know it looks really good
Our door is finished
It shuts and locks
It's done
It feels good to finish it
[music]
Last week while we were working on the outside my friend Esther came over and she was a big help
And we were all just kind of singing songs
Esther do you mind being in the video?
No
I give you my consent to put my beautiful face on the screen
Let's just say men of his stature are in short supply
You may have to "lower" your expectations
Recently, we've all really gotten into a movie on Netflix called Shrek the Musical and we've all been
singing the songs, quoting the lines
[singing] Now he lives in squaller
Me and Bree were really happy when
Esther saw the show with us. So that she gets all of our jokes now and understands our quoting
But you have to be this tall to get in
What can I say?
It is  almost Gru, it's a little weirder.
I don't even know what I think
I don't have time for Diesel antics
[music]
In the next three days things are really going to get serious
We do not have everything done that we would like to have done. So we've been really putting in an extra effort
[music]
We're going to be bringing out a hopper that we used in my room for the cob and we're going to be putting stucco through
it and stuccoing the walls with it.
It' a modified
mud hopper or sheetrock actually
the technique that worked the best for keeping the mud on the wall
is to actually use a method where we wet it down to almost a liquid
Bryson would throw his thumb over the top of the hopper hole, I guess, and then when he's ready to release the air
He would just pull his thumb away
I think thicker or two coats. That's what I say
I wanted it really wet and Dad wanted it really dry.
So like a slurry Dad
Try something like this. You are probably right.
It pours out, but it sure goes on nice
we were on opposite ends of the field and
Bree comes in and says, why don't you guys just make an in-between batch.
This is slightly thicker, okay?
just to ease both you and Dad. Happy medium.
Okay, go get it. See what happens. I'm game for something new
Leave it up to her for the logic
looks like water
[music]
Nice huh?
Good?
Yeah
although I still think it should have been wetter
[music]
I need windshield wipers
Every once in a while, my dog would lose sight of me
and howling and howling. M dog is so attached to me
I'm right here.
What you doing buddy?
You have to get better at tracking Dude.
I can't go anywhere without him howling for me if I lose him
Don't worry about it. I got you.
[music]
All right, point out spots Dad
Because I know you probably got a thousand of them
We get done covering the main coat of the building and then I hear Dad
And he goes, I want to do another batch.
Pretty tired.
You were pretty tired
I was not very happy at that. But, I knew that we had to do it because, you know
a few spots we needed to fix up
[music]
Mom was watching me clean off the bottle and how the light would just like shine through in the room would get
a smidgen bit lighter and it was really, it was really kind of cool
Before we start painting we need to clean off some of the stucco. Shae found the perfect tool
I get to sweep the eves
Sounds productive, am I right?
[music]
The guys get out there, and they paint a section on the building and I'm just not liking the color
Part of winning is experimenting.
That meant a trip to the store real quick to pick up some green, but we did find some
By the time I got done mixing all of this paint up and getting this new color for Shelly, Bryson is gone
It's computer problems
Bree's computer crashed, and that's kind of an important computer for all of us
with the livestreams and with her own work
So Bryson's in there doing some first aid on her computer.
And I'm left to paint this thing by myself
[music]
If you painted the eaves of a home before, it's like totally frustrating. And having an air sprayer like in your hand, doing the eaves
is the coolest thing
I feel really bad because Gary, he's trying to accommodate the fact that I didn't like the color
But I'm still not liking it. I'm thinking well, maybe when Gary takes that plastic down
I'll actually like it, but it's just not happening. I look out there and like okay. Yeah, I like it
I like it, and then as the day goes on
I
just I just
I don't know what to say
It has to be right if you're not going to like the color, you're not going to like looking out there
It's a pretty color
I just don't think it fits into our desert scheme because it looks to me like it belongs on the beach somewhere
Aqua Blue - there is a lot of blue in that color
Ocean. Surfing
I start looking into other ways to change the color
Sponging, ragging, rolling, anything. I'm searching online
When it comes to the outside Mom's the final decision
We're going to go with the dark green
and then Bree is going to put a little bit of white over it.
I think I'm going to like this a little more
It's kind of toned that down a little bit, so I'm really hoping I'm going to like it
The trim color, too
It's going to be really fun it.
I think it  looks like chocolate mint ice cream
mmm I like the way you think
I really like this look - I think it adds. It's kind of a organic and creativity of of
these shapes and textures, and it hides a lot of the bumps and blemishes in these buildings
I'm liking it
[music]
I thought you had your headsets on. I thought I was safe to say that out loud
What have you done
um it's between my toes
ewww [multiple voices]
That's not comfortable.
That was a "wow"
That was magical
I think I'm finally really happy with the color
It actually looks more deserty. It now has that little texture.
granite, marble type of texture yeah, yeah
And it's hidden a lot of the blemishes. I like that too.
If you look at it with your eyes closed
it disappears.
That's true. That's probably what I should of done before and then we wouldn't of had to do the ragging
The family heads back inside to work on the stair rail.
We decide to de-bark the stair posts.
What are you doing?
Look away
It's not flattering let me I'll make myself look better here
no, just chips off the old block
I got this tool. Which is the good tool if we're honest
You know Shae, I really have quite an advantage with this tool
Oh, yeah, optimism
Shae, are you shaping?
I don't personally think that Bree should be able to film anymore because all she can do when she comes over to film us is
pun after pun
You need to get out of here. Now
[music]
A bigger bark than it's bite? [laughter]
You're not welcome in the workspace anymore
Did you get some? He's de-barking that little piece right there.
[music]
Hand railing that I'll be putting around here
You can imagine that you have this curve, and you have pieces that are really curved
I mean
they're the pieces of Mesquite
Twisted and turned and so on
It's a puzzle to be able to put them all together in a railing like this
So that was a lot of fun
I think what I'm going to go ahead and do when I put the railings together is to just go ahead and overlap them
Then run a bolt right through the middle and down into the post
[music]
This is so beautiful Dad
This giggly person here is my friend. She's gonna help us with the work today.
Hi
she actually volunteered
[music]
I got brown chicken pox.
so much easier and more fun to work with a friend because
you can sing
[singing] All I can say is "your welcome"
I hope to come back during the summer and help you guys build more
yeah free labor
thank you for your help too
of course
[music]
I left the door open
What have you done?
nothing
Nothing at all
[music]
Are you going to do a lot of those little ones?
Yeah, they're supposed to be designed for like, kids
So they don't stick their heads through and stuff
So you put them real close together.
So I figure if we leave the stickers on, the  kids won't even what to touch them
true
Yeah, good thinking
[music]
What is that?
That's an ocotillo
I didn't even recognize it
[music]
That's pretty good wood down there. So just getting down to that white wood. We're ready to go
I use my draw knife
Yeah
see the top on it?
so that you have a slat so the distance between
the bottom of that hole and the top of this hole is greater
So that you can just push it in on the top, slide it in and pull it down, put a nail right there
So let the determination of how far apart these are
I just don't want Diesel to be able to fit
[music]
Diesel proof.
It looks like it's Gonna work.
Yeah good boy
We have this
section beside the stairwell that goes on down that's on the left hand side that is unused space
Perfect spot to put
to put storage, cabinets and
fill that up with as many cabinets as we could afford and just for one
Cabinet is a little over $100. See if we could find some used ones
I find this deal of these looks like a lot of cabinets. We're going to go look at them and
Really to our shock. They didn't come out of a kitchen.
No. They didn't. They were all custom cabinets.
Oh, thanks Dad, I don't know if we could of handled that one
Big I know
very nicely made very strong. Maybe even better than what I could have put together
no. never
They were really good.
when gary and I were going in to purchase them - we'll try to get them for $75
this is going to save us a ton of work
But when we got there, I looked over at Gary. I'm like
No don't offer any less. It was too embarrassing.
It so much cabinets. It was already such a good deal
And the guy was just great too.
Yeah, he was a wonderful man
They're really nice too.
very well built
fuchsia
I can 3D print dragon heads for them
that would be cool
Took two trips because one of them filled up the whole bed in the back
Every time you can close something down behind closed doors. The place...
Can't see it from my house
You know what I mean
We're just putting a white base coat on and then we'll go back through and antique it. It will look totally different.
[music]
[singing] Your so vain, you probably think this building is about you
You're so vain
He's like, what is going on?
[music]
Shae has painted this all white now
it's really cool
Keep antiquing.
What's the word on the cracks mom?
Well you can see now. They are actually coming through we were worried
They weren't going to come through and that was one of the things we wanted.
It's the coolest color
It does have a lot of texture. That's for sure
Yeah, it totally it totally matches the fun kind of shape and theme that we have going on in here
Love this idea here. It's kind of a leathery
stone look or cave wall. I just love this - dark spots, light spots - it has a nice texture to it
The cracks lead credence to some kind of bricks or something. It's nice. I like this
[music]
The guys get started installing the cabinets
That was very cool
We decided to go with the two, long 53 by 42
we put the two of those together, and then a taller one that is 80 inches by 32
we drilled holes and we put bolts through the
connecting pieces at the
Because it's a round wall and square cabinets
So wherever they connected we stuck a bolt in there
now that I have the arrangement
We'll just go ahead and take the cabinet doors off
so I'm going to sand everything down and we're going to match the stain that we're going to use for the railing
One coat of Red Oak
Gary's idea is to do just a long streak. So we just do one long streak
[music]
How are you standing there? Are you on the edge?
I built scaffolding
Oh do I dare look?
Yeah, Look
Then if I get bored
Gary Stop.
Well, I'm wearing safety gear
what?
I have shoes on
You know those two you just put in
Oh yeah
[music]
3 and 5/8ths
Watch your finger
[music]
That's when I discover something we hid from you last time.
We didn't show it because it's a secret
Now it's not secret anymore.
Hey will I fit in there?
yeah
don't fall down to the third floor
Ya! Just kidding
In those old movies when they open up the shutters and they start yelling
She's very organized the way she sweeps each step separately
Don't judge me
I love the way you sweep
I'm so sweepy
at least I'm cleaning
That's true you are working.
you have a very sweeping personality
We're getting ready
to cob-arooney. My strategically placed bucket.
If we have empty space under the stairs
We can name that Harry Potter's room.
it looks like something from hogwarts
[music]
Back at it again. We're trying to get our railing in for our stairwell
How's it going Dad?
It's going great.
Oh, Hi Bree with camera
What's up?
[music]
A year from now you'll wish you started today.
You don't know who said it
nope
[music]
That's it
Secure the handrail right here. This is nice and secured. This is secure and that will be secured down here
[music]
Dad and Garen begin planning for the murphy bed
And just started watching, looking, drawing
this whole section here
Is going to be right in here
and then we  spent a couple hours
figuring out exactly what we wanted to do
My son has designed a little bracket that will fit our situation and I'm
trying to determine
how to build the frame
There is plenty of room to get on either side of the bed
Cob-a-knobbing
Ellie's Gonna come to help us out
I'm going to go ahead and put a can light downstairs
What are you thinking right here?
that looks good
Hey, Dad do you want to come down here for a sec?
Cost you a dollar. Got a buck?
That mark here, I put it right in the center
perfect absolutely perfect. That will be a nice light down here
Yeah, you found me? good boy
The mirrors for down below as someone very kindly gave to us. Thank you Pam is going to be awesome
Jet mirrors
How should I attach these things?
[music]
It's not like you would expect.
It's actually soft
We have a solar light - nothing like seeing yourself everywhere
So we're good now or shut off lights and see how much brighter is is right?
yeah
Wow, that is a whole ton better.
Yeah look it's even reflecting off the wall
[music]
Perfect, we're done
This is going to be for our Murphy bed
We found somebody who had a great design to make the frame in the box
Today we put together the box
It was simple a couple pieces of plywood - nails or screws
glued
this is
the bottom piece or actually the right side piece. It's going to go up onto the right side
And it should fit right up here against the wall
And be the right side of our murphy bed
hard to make a round cut with a straight saw
[music]
We're going to do the same thing we did in my room. Which is using these floor panels as ceiling panels inside of the stairs
That's nice. Just like there's a light up there
That's really cool
We found a seat swivel for a boat
it's a six inch plate with a nice swivel
And that's the main mechanism for both sides
it will sit here
[music]
It will be comfortable.
This pieces are going to need quite a bit of cleaning
[music]
Just an L bracket with a spring offset on the L bracket
and then the seat swivel will be offset as well
That way we'll get tension when the bed's coming down.
So it doesn't just fall
We're going to get these two hinges installed and finish up the murphy bed
Is your arm in there?
It's out. I'm okay
should we squish the dogs?
we don't need them right?
And the good thing is that if it's wrong, we'll just unscrew and fix it
This will send down. Yeah. This can go up. This is that
[music]
Hold it
Go up with it
okay stop
Okay, we need to get it up past this. We have to go through it
Alright bring it down. Let's see what happens.
Counterweights it really nicely
it does
There, it's good. Okay. I have a spring?
Let me jump out
how's that feel Bry?
Get two of those bad boys.
It was fun. There was a lot of thinking that went into it
I like that
It turned out to be a lot simpler which was which was really good.
Yeah, I'll be able to do that
We got functionality on all the mechanical
parts of this thing built.
the springs are in, the hinges are in.Iit's going to work really good.
Hey all right
Oh yeah that's easy peasy
The material for the ceiling arrives
we got some canvas here for the ceiling
Oh, well, not exactly canvas
100 yards of burlap
there it is
we love the look of the reciprocal roof.
It's got this cute little design
It's a shame to think that we might have to cover that up, so we started thinking about
how could we do that?
we could could put stuff in-between there
Still be able to see the design
we're going to staple this up in between the boards so that we'll still have the boards
showing and then we'll have little sections of burlap with the insulation underneath it.
We're hoping it's going to work
We're doing nothing more than the little top part right here
That's my job while Mom and Bryson have been putting up the burlap and the insulation
I have to stay ahead of them because we wanted to be stained before we put it up there.
Duct tape it with a rag Shae
so doesn't drip
[music]
We're gonna have a finish line to work for
If we set up the goal of finishing up the MusArt studio
It would be so overwhelming it would be
miserable
yeah, so we set up small goals
which is what we did on the ceiling and I think I got a little over ambitious on this one
Tuesday and Wednesday, and so on all the way to the top
today's Wednesday, which we're suppose to be on this layer
and we're still on Tuesday
We need to  catch up.
I think the kids thought I was a little ridiculous this time when I named the rows
Tuesday's done
Now we're sitting at the Thursday, and I don't know
Still fun to have the goals and try to achieve them
but if we miss them
Like in this case. There's a pretty good chance we're not going to make this one
Every once in a while her goals get a little ambitious
And if they're just barely ambitious, typically us kids are like. Oh, no, Mom
No, this is where our goal is.
But if there extremely ambitious, we're like okay
Come here, I would like to brush your hair
Hmm.This is one time I'm going to deny your request
just lean would you?
[music]
And eventually Mom's like
This was a giant goal!
[music]
What's kind of fun about these projects is I really enjoy the time that we come out together as a family
And we spend an hour of our day when we're all together working side by side
On this project,
We couldn't really all be out there together as a family because we only have one staple gun
We picked up this air gun for the job, and oh it's so worth it
This is a good investment.
We took turns working in pairs or three of us would go out at various times
It's some of the best ways to build relationships with each other
whether it's family or even friends
I think that when you have to work with someone it's even more of a test to that
friendship or relationship
How are you keeping up there?
Watch this magic
Put up the cotton candy from hell
There's also you just have to kind of build off each other a lot in a work space
You can't endanger someone when you're working
You have to know  where everyone's at
and you have to communicate
Those frustrating moments you have to work out
A lot of
compromising when it comes to ideas - a lot of middle ground. It's like okay. Let's
compromise here
That would be one way to learn
[music]
Bryson?
He has been 3d printing these little
dragon heads. We're going to use them like...
Well, just like this in the music studio. Cabinet door handles
So we ordered some black plastic online to replace the pink knobs that are on the cabinets now
Hi Buddy
So we started out printing on Garen's printer because my printer was broken down at the time.
It's finished
kind of like a frog
It just needs to have all the support stuff taken off
It's cute, isn't it?
It's very cute. Gosh. It's just silky, beautiful
To supposingly keep our hands safe
But I don't want to smash this or ruin this
Take a drill bit and
I was showing Shae how to drill the holes into the back of them
Oh my goodness
I'm gonna go get the old knobs
Let me get a screw here and see if I can get it
I'm not in my pajamas
What?
[whistles]
Ahahaha
It's not easy
Maybe if I held it on this side
We used the same method that the other knobs did where the screw simply screws into the back
First ones done. Look at that
From it's ears.
sure is a process though
Looking Good Shae
So our original number is 12
But we may end up printing more depending on how many cabinets
We may put some
larger ones for the murphy bed
going to keep all my fabrics in here.
Keep my equipment in here.
Oh Yeah
Wow, you're booking away on this
[music]
We ran out
We'll have to finish this up later
You know one of things that's
always with every project
is how do we get enough time to do all the things that we need to do
And I travel for work sometimes so it requires me to be out of town for three, four, sometimes five days
You know it's frustrating knowing that everybody's here at the house
working real hard like they're working on the ceiling.
I'd really long to be with them too
and be there. When I am away
It's really
reassuring to know that
Bryson and Garen are here, a part of the family
upholding and I know that both boys really step up to the plate when Dad's gone
And I just like, okay good. I feel better on the inside.
These are the spindles for the headboard
dry out a little
It's so cool to come back and be able to play here and create and
have a lot of fun. That to me. It's like one of the coolest things about what we're doing here
[music]
I really like the stain that Dad is putting on.
Ooh, I didn't even see the railing. That looks so cool
[music]
We are driving towards the goal of completing the underground music studio
With several finishing touches still needed to be completed, the family heads downstairs to see what's next
Ooh, it's really dark in here.
The gap between the ceiling and the wall still needs to be filled
okay this looks really ridiculous
But we did this on Bryson's room
it goes between the ceiling and the wall
and we'll trim it off and paint it purple
and it will look halfway decent
I use this spray foam stuff
I do not
take responsibility for my fallage
troublemakers
you want a different color
[music]
This is where Dad supposedly fell through
Yeah, he said he fell through all the time, but he really just stepped
a small step
Should I cut it out just exactly like he fell out?
You should  just put a bandaid on it and have that sign it
okay, do you have a tape measurer?
No, it's upstairs
He puts them away in "Lost"
Maybe he put it in the house
With so many of us working. We're always misplacing the tape measure
Where's your sense of adventure Bryson?
Gosh, so unfun
We only have so many of these
be a little careful
Can I cut it?
Yeah, please do
[music]
Actually Mom I think we were both right
All right. Go make us proud
[music]
Were going to try to trim this off
to make it look like it is part of the wall
it just look like it's part of that stucco wall
And then Shae will come back and paint it with a purple
And then it will blend in a little bit better
I slipped and  kind of tripped and did that. Isn't it beautiful?
Yeah
it's like my
signature
yeah
[music]
I don't have a light down here.
Working?
Yeah
[fan starting up]
I wired up the fan so that they'll work off just a normal plug in
mainly because we just wanted to test them and
we needed to get some airflow down there
and they're working great.
Oh, yeah, I can feel it
There's already changing temperature in here
Bryson and I - we were on the electrical for the building
We started on all the outlets
Got them them in. We banged that out pretty quick
Where the tape measure? I need the tape measure.
Getting the height of the light is the challenge part. They all are a little different
What are you wearing?
Army pants, flip flops and...
Isn't that kind of uncomfortable with that in your toe like that
Very comfortable
[laughter]
[music]
Why are you filming me?
What are you doing?
Putting in lights
[music]
The can lights were already in right?
The can lights were already in, we just put in the caps
we got light bulbs
This is the  unboxing and drop test
[laughter]
oh sweet oh
I'm so much faster than you
What's this Bryson? Why are you messing me up?
I'm not messing you up. You said you can do it faster
Serious
Yes I'm serious
Are you serious?
Yes I am serious
Screw in a lightbulb Bry.
Okay, I'm gonna go plug it in
Okay let's see if this thing works
The testing at the end was
everything worked
Which was
See that, that is so cool
good. It means we did it right
It looks so cool
Let's go downstairs Bree and check it out
Where's the switch?
Let's see. That's the fan.
Really lights this room up pretty good.
Yeah, it does
it looks great guys wonderful work
Got home from work today, and I'm so excited the boys went ahead and got all the electrical hooked up
It's all working so good, so I'm very excited. They did a great job
The last thing needed for this building project is the floors
[music]
you too sir
Our burlap came so we will be able to finish that
and look over here too, our flooring material
So we are ready to go
Whoa!
[music]
Shae what you doing?
I'm cleaning the steps that we can fill in the holes
and chisel of the weird little things
[music]
Yeah, I got this one
This is Marvin. He's back.
What are you guys up to today?
Trying to get some pad laid down
Marvin has graciously
donated some carpet
we took it right out of his house
so they don't have any carpet in that room now
He said you could do without for a few months. No big deal.
I like perfect
It looks good. It looks good all the way down
pick up a little stragglers
[music]
It is so silent in here
I'm going to get the iron out
that one little piece almost covers the whole thing
yeah
[music]
Testing out the new carpet
sick
So I get to mess up if we mess up.
Yeah
I do kind of like the red tint.
I think I do too
I like that a lot. Much approval Mom.
Do you want me to sweep it for you and then you come back through and paint it?
Yeah
I'd like to make a point that Mom has started painting at the top of the step which is clearly a wise decision
When there is no other exit
I'm only going to do half down and half back up.
You just you got this figured out
Obviously, I don't
[music]
Get some new blades on our tools
Gary has this idea to put foam floor on the upstairs floor
Should we see what it looks like?
I didn't want a big gray floor up there
I like the foam idea
to our surprise we found out that they made foam in patterns
three-quarter inch plank
And the only place we're going to use a straight edge is in front of the door
Yeah, everything else is cut.
Bring it  over. Let's get started
Once we get this first layer down
We can all just get going on it
so ebay we found our best price
And they had a marble pattern
I would prefer that but for whatever reason, it was a lot higher price
so we just went with the lightest flooring that we could find
I think we want to glue
this down like around the edges
I don't think so. We can always do it if we need to
Shelly, you should come up
Yeah, come up and look.
You're going to like it.
Oh, I love it
Wow, they're big. I don't know why I would realize they're so big
they're fun to have under your feet though
there's a top hard plastic coating to the top of this
it's not like foam
This floor is going to clean up real nice
when it's laid there
I thought it would look really corny
But I thought well at least it would be pattern, easy to clean and it's got the foam
and it's not gray.
Can we get a drill too and we'll
open up our thing and see where we need to cut
I'm going to build a square
trim Dad right?
on inside of here
[music]
Should I start just laying down?
yeah
I'll peal the ends off and set them there
I think of all the jobs that we've done on this building so far
this one's my favorite.
Maybe you can play like
I don't know
[music]
Awwww
What?
I just cut this one in wrong.
The grains of the wood is going the wrong way.
That's okay
It's gonna be because
yeah, we're not going to notice.
That's a really ocd cray cray dude
I'm having a heart attack. It's singing off key
You know what the cool thing about someone singing off-key is?
what?
it makes you realize how
good the people singing on-key are
yeah, it also makes you lament that one person is in the choir
[music]
This is amazing
I love this
To my surprise it actually
looks really good. It  has a vinyl top on it
So you can kind of clean it off you need to and so that's the nice thing
you can walk on it
You clean it.
It sweeps up nice.
It's not very expensive, and I think too
if one gets ruined, you just replace it with another
I don't know how you know how long it will last
and how well it will hold that, but I guess we'll see
Let's give it a tr
that's what we're about
Dude, this is so cool
not to much left
We got to trim around those
[music]
How do you like the new floor? Huh?
notice these and and those
Been cutting some metal here getting ready
to create the brackets that are going to hold
the murphy bed up
just getting fabricated now
will get cleaned up
and then the bracket will go from here over and
then we'll tie them together and put them on
[music]
Don't fall in the hole
What hole?
Awwww
That hole
Unwrapping it?
Yeah.
Hey it fits
This is comfy
[music]
Notice how the crossbars is wood?
Yeah, Dad likes it a lot better than metal
[music]
Oh No
Yep, Dad is going to be really mad at himself
Push
Ut oh
Ut, ut oh
Daddy did a boo-boo.
Can you fix it Bry? We won't even tell him
[music]
We just finished our MusArt studio. Let's go take a look around
Welcome to my MusArt studio
Riighht
Shae, would you like to show off your corner?
Technically this is my work area and that is my work area, but we like to say that is everyone work area
But this one's specifically designated to moi
Are you sure that's not the boyfriend
communication station
BHQ
Boyfriend headquarters right here
[music]
This is the rocket stove here
that Shae and Dad designed and put together and this baby's going to keep us warm
during the winter time
We have a vent. We can vent to people now.
Just why!!!
You said I could vent on it right?
You don't even need my therapist anymore
This is our Murphy bed
Our cousin Ashton was actually the first one to sleep in the murphy bed
[music]
You love it don't you
Sleep good
okay.
Let's rock and roll downstairs to the studio part of the studio
[music]
You'll actually probably notice the sound difference from upstairs to here
So we're still putting in furniture
and now we'll do the narrating
The MusArt studio
We begin with down tones
Can't get enough of my buttery voice?
Wait, wait, wait. Here we go.
What are you doing?
I'm just showing how beautiful you guys look in this light.
Can't always count on that light
Is there anything else?
Look at this. This is our most beautiful editor in the world
Our most beautiful mom
Give me the camera please
Thank-you. That was delightful
Where's the big screen TV and the refrigerator?
This is not a guy den
man cave
Oh, that's what it is. A man cave
[music]
It has this olden, artistic feel to it. I love the curtains and colored bottles.
I like being in here
I just really like it and just the skylight at top just a beautiful look
it still has that modern feel though
It's creative and fun.
The purpose of this building to have a place where we can think creatively
And a place to work
You don't really realize how huge this building is
It's bigger on the inside. I didn't make a Dr. Who reference. What right?
So let's go outside
[music]
Reflects light and reflects it on the inside at the bottom of the stairs.
Oh and here's a little bit of cob on our window
[music]
We installed a patio here. Actually, it an entry way ramp.
So that wraps up for this building
Put it on repeat.
Put it on replay.
you can wash all your dishes to it
Thanks so much for being here. Bye
See ya
Our family moved from the city to the country. Thanks for taking part in our adventure
We have new videos every Friday evening. If you would like to help us out
You can like this video, share it, subscribe or support us on Patreon.
See the links in the description
Please consider supporting us on Patreon